21-04-2025

Devops is a combination of tools, practices, cultural philosophy that helps in delivering high quality software faster and more quality through automation and collaboration.

Gate Management in Devops: It acts as a control checkpoint. It has a gate where it checks whether the process can be moved to further stage or not.


Different Cloud Service Models

IaaS ( Infrastructure as a Service): It is a model where complete infrastructure is provided by the cloud provider such as virtual machines, storage, networks

Advantages:
Complete Control
Access to any type of cloud resource
Pay as you go
Scalability
Elastic IP: Assigned fixed public IP to a resource
Self service provisioning: It defines defining resources on our own 

Different ways to access and create resources in Azure:

i) Azure ARM Template
ii) Azure Bicep
iii) Azure Portal
iv) Terraform

Categories of Cloud:
	Public: Shared all over the world
	Private: Shared across a organization or a group
	Hybrid: Mix of Public and Private clouds


PaaS ( Platform as a Service ): It provides a platform to deploy and develop the applications. You can consider all NFRs can come under the PaaS.
Advantages:
	Scalability
	Deployment & Control
	Ownership & control
	Data & Application Responsibility
	
SaaS ( Software as a Service ): It provides software applications to ready use
Advantages of SaaS:
	Web based access
	Multi tenant architecture
	Accessibility from anywhere
	Lower upfront cost
	Scalability
	Flexibility
	Accessibility
	Usability

22/04/2025

Strategy- long term
Tactics - Short term steps taken to solve Non Functional Requirements

Bastian Host:  Acts as a controlled intermediary that administrators or users can use to access internal virtual machines (VMs) without exposing those VMs directly to the internet.

Zone: Independent Data center in a region
Vnet: It is a network that spans across a region. Vnet is specific to account. Its scope is across region. We can add multiple subnets and their range while creating Vnet. 
In Azure 
	1st IP address is reserved for Network Address
	2nd IP address is reserved for Azure Internal Use that is for to manage the Azure infrastructure of Vnet and its resources.
	3rd IP address is also reserved for Azure's internal use. This address is often used for the VNet gateway or other Azure services that require a dedicated IP for management and routing purposes.
V net peering: It allows to pair the two regions and one machine from one region can talk to another machine in another region through private address.
Scaleset Service: Autoscale the number of vms. We need to create load balancer infront of a scale set.
Fault Domain: Distribute VMs across multiple fault domains
Azure Files: It is a managed file share service in the cloud that uses the standard Server Message Block (SMB) protocol. It allows multiple clients to mount and share files concurrently.


23-04-2025

Resource group: In azure resource group is a container that holds related resources for azure solution. It is logically grouping of resources that allows to manage and organize them collectively.

Azure Subscription is a logical container used to provision resources in Azure. It is associated with a specific Azure account and is used to manage billing and access to Azure services.

Network Security Group (NSG) is a set of security rules that allow or deny inbound and outbound network traffic to Azure resources.

Rules: Each NSG can contain multiple rules, and rules are processed in priority order. The first rule that matches the traffic will apply.
Association: NSGs can be associated with subnets or individual network interfaces, allowing for granular control over traffic


Vnet is created with 3 subnets such as frontend, backend, private with private as private that is by default outbound access is blocked. After that Network security groups were created such as public and private. The public NSG subnet is associated with frontend and backend where as private NSG subnet is associated with private. The virtual machines are created with frontend,backend,private with no public IP to the backend. Then in NSGs the private Inbound rules  is changed with the only backend VM can access.


24-04-2025

Azure Global Infrastructure:

Geography
Region
Availability Zones
Region pairs: two regions within the same geography with atleast 300 miles apart
Edge locations: are datacenters or facilities providing Azure services closer to end-users (outside the Azure regional network).
Used by Azure CDN and Azure Front Door for caching and traffic acceleration.
Reduces latency and improves performance for end-users globally.
Cloud CDN ( Content Delivery Network ): global distributed network of servers that cache and deliver web content, video, and files at high speed.
ARM ( Azure Resource Manager ):  is the deployment and management service for Azure resources 

Account: An Azure Account is tied to an email address and is used to sign in and manage Azure subscriptions and resources.
Grants  billing and/or administrative access.



Entra ID: User entry in the azure database
	Refers to a user object in Microsoft Entra ID (formerly Azure Active Directory).
Represents a single person, device, or service that can authenticate against Azure resources.

Tenant: An Azure Tenant is a dedicated, isolated instance of Microsoft Entra ID (Azure AD).
Provides identity and access management for users, groups, and applications.
Each tenant is unique and associated with a single organization.
TenantID
Management Groups: are containers for managing access, policy, and compliance across multiple Azure subscriptions.

Hierarchy:
Microsoft Entra ID (Tenant)
    └── Management Groups (optional, hierarchical)
          └── Subscriptions
                └── Resource Groups
                      └── Resources

Vnets creation and Vnet peering through Azure CLI:
So that the machines in different Vnets can talk with each other using private address so that it
can communicate using azure internet capabilities which decreases latency.

az network vnet create --resource-group gowriRG --name gowriVnet1 --address-prefixes 10.23.0.0/16 

az network vnet create --resource-group gowriRG --name gowriVnet1 --address-prefixes 10.24.0.0/16

az network vnet subnet create --resource-group gowriRG --vnet-name gowriVnet1  --name gowrisubnetV1 --address-prefix 10.23.0.0/24

az network vnet subnet create --resource-group gowriRG --vnet-name gowriVnet2  --name gowrisubnetV2 --address-prefix 10.24.0.0/24

az vm create  --resource-group gowriRG  --name gowriVnet1 --location eastus  --image "Ubuntu2204" --size Standard_B1s --vnet-name gowriVnet1  --subnet gowrisubnetV1  --admin-username gowri --admin-password PassConsole@azure1

az vm create  --resource-group gowriRG  --name gowriVnet2 --location eastus  --image "Ubuntu2204" --size Standard_B1s --vnet-name gowriVnet2  --subnet gowrisubnetV2  --admin-username gowri --admin-password PassConsole@azure1

az network vnet peering create --name gowrivnetpeering --resource-group gowriRG --vnet-name gowriVnet1 --remote-vnet gowriVnet2 --allow-vnet-access

az network vnet peering create  --name VNet1-to-VNet2 --resource-group gowriRG --vnet-name gowriVnet1 --remote-vnet gowriVnet2 --allow-vnet-access

az network vnet peering create  --name VNet2-to-VNet1 --resource-group gowriRG --vnet-name gowriVnet2 --remote-vnet gowriVnet1 --allow-vnet-access
